Geo Open Accessibility Tool (GOAT) is a flexible and interactive software used for accessibility planning. The main focus of GOAT is active mobility (walking & cycling). In a number of urban centres across the globe, active mobility (walking & cycling) take the largest share of transport activities. The GOAT as tool can be applied to every place in the world, thanks to the use of OpenStreetMap data and its distribution as open source project.

One of the problems that GOAT is designed to assist in is urban accessibility and planning, especially when it comes to active mobility. It is evident that active mobility as a transport mode is not only less costly but also healthy. Decision makers and planners don’t usually deliver expected results on matters of urban planning but with GOAT this might be a thing of the past.
The technical architecture of GOAT largely comprises of open source software, with libraries, programming languages and databases. GOAT uses the classical server-client architecture with PostgreSQL/PostGIS database as the main storage system. Operations in the database are done by procedural programming languages PI/pgSQL and PI/Python.
In GOAT, the web geoserver is used for sharing of geospatial data. At the moment, OpenStreetMap (OSM) data is the only kind of data used however other data sources and types can be inserted into the database for analysis purposes. 
This current setup was tested on an Ubuntu 18.04 machine but is available for other operating systems like Windows, Mac as well as other Linux Distros. 
If you like this project consider giving it a start on GitHub today.